

Analysis


The aircraft was maintained in accordance with existing regulations, and there was no indication that a deficiency in the aircraft could have been a contributing factor in the crash.


All indications are that the pilot suffered an acute cardiac episode with sudden incapacitation during the climb-out, and that he had let go of the controls, resulting in the aircraft pitching nose-down. In fact, the autopsy determined the cause of death to be drowning, and that the victim suffered from severe coronary arteriosclerosis. This condition would explain his inaction when the aircraft pitched nose-down and during the evacuation; both passengers were conscious following impact, and managed to evacuate the aircraft, while only the pilot remained in his seat without attempting to unbuckle his seat belt.


The pilot never reported that he had a heart condition nor that he had been treated for that condition. He only reported that he was treated for hypertension, and provided a copy of the results of an exercise electrocardiogram dated 15 June 2001. Upon receipt of the results, the civil aviation medical examiner assessed the document and signed the pilot's medical certificate. The electrocardiogram provided by the specialist was from the previous year.


The fact that neither of the passengers was wearing a life jacket approved under aviation regulations at the time of take-off may have had an impact on the passenger's survival.



Findings as to Causes and Contributing Factors


The autopsy performed on the pilot revealed that the probable cause of death was drowning. The pilot did, however, suffer from significant coronary arteriosclerosis, to the extent that his condition could have led to sudden cardiac incapacitation. The pilot and passengers were not wearing life jackets during take-off. Wearing a life jacket might have saved the passenger's life.



Findings as to Risk


A single life jacket, not of the type approved under aviation regulations, was found on board the aircraft. Upon receipt of a copy of the results of an exercise electrocardiogram from the previous year, the civil aviation medical examiner assessed the document and signed the pilot's medical certificate.

