

Analysis


It is most likely that the polypropylene rope, used to snug the top of the bonnet, slid up the beckets and the bonnet opened in flight. The pilot described seeing the starboard front area of the bonnet folded in, likely because the separated becket allowed the formation of an asymmetric shape. The resulting shape and the bonnet's light weight and high drag allowed the bonnet to fly up and into the flight path of the helicopter, carrying the longline with it. The longline subsequently came into contact with the tail rotor and disabled it, rendering the helicopter uncontrollable.


At impact, it is likely that the pilot's upper body moved around the cabin. This would have been facilitated by the lack of an upper-body restraining device and is evident by the pilot's fractured helmet. The helmet protected the pilot's head from severe injury, thereby allowing him to extricate himself from the sunken wreckage. However, in this particular helicopter, even when persons occupying either front seat are properly secured, they risk hitting their heads on the fixture to which the liferaft is normally secured.


The colour of the pilot's helmet and flight suit (grey and navy blue, respectively) made it difficult to see him in the ocean, thereby increasing the risk of him not being found and rescued.



Finding as to Causes and Contributing Factors


The rope used to snug the top of the bonnet most likely slid up the beckets, allowing the bonnet to open and fly into the flight path of the helicopter carrying the longline with it. The longline came into contact with the tail rotor and disabled it, rendering the helicopter uncontrollable.



Findings as to Risk


Most helicopters are not designed or certified to accommodate vertical reference external load operations; however, these operations are very common and pilots fly in this higher-risk environment without proper safety-restraint devices. It is likely that the pilot's unrestrained upper body moved around the cabin at impact. This increased the risk of injury and, in this case, the risk of drowning. Even when properly secured, persons in either front seat risk hitting their heads on a fixture to which the liferaft is normally secured. The colour of the pilot's helmet, life-vest cover and flight suit (grey and navy blue, respectively) made it difficult to see him in the ocean, increasing the risk of him not being found and rescued.



Other Finding


The pilot's helmet protected his head from severe injury, allowing him to extricate himself from the sunken wreckage.

