

Analysis


The group was on vacation, and there were no time constraints that should have pressured them to complete the flight even if deteriorating weather conditions were expected. They were unaccustomed to flying in eastern Canada, where rapidly changing weather conditions could be expected. The good weather at Natashquan and the group's inexperience with local weather patterns probably led them to believe there was no need to request a weather update.


When the pilot of C-GBZG last communicated with the group, about 30 miles west of St. Pauls Inlet, there was no indication that he was having any aircraft difficulties. The aircraft's last observed flight characteristics and the accident site examination indicate that the aircraft was in controlled flight prior to and at the time of impact. Results of the pathological examination provided no evidence of pre-existing disease or conditions which could have led to pilot incapacitation prior to impact.


The weather at St. Pauls Inlet had not deteriorated to below VFR limits, and the pilot should have had visual reference with the aircraft in front of him. He had a VFR navigation chart, and the visibility below cloud was sufficient to identify the coast and rising terrain beyond the inlet.


The group organizer was unsuccessful in contacting the pilot of C-GBZG after the aircraft was observed entering cloud. It is possible that C-GBZG hit the terrain before the pilot received the radio transmission "turn immediately" or that the transmission was received too late for him to take evasive action.


The pilot of C-GBZG, although not IFR rated, was an experienced pilot, had received a considerable amount of IFR flight training, and was known to have previously entered into instrument meteorological conditions during VFR flight. It is probable that the pilot intentionally entered cloud, unaware of his proximity to the rising terrain. Based on the vertical speed indication of 1,300 feet per minute down, it is probable that the pilot was descending the aircraft to regain visual reference with the ground when the aircraft hit the terrain.


Toxicological testing showed that there was alcohol in the blood sample taken from the pilot's body. However, because of the possibility that the percentage of alcohol in the blood was affected by putrefaction and contamination, the level of alcohol in the pilot's blood at the time of his death cannot be determined precisely.


The following Engineering Branch report was completed:


LP 99/96 - Instrument Examination.



Findings


The aircraft was maintained in accordance with Transport Canada requirements, and the weight and balance was within approved limits at the time of impact. There was no evidence of any aircraft system failure prior to the accident. The aircraft was in controlled flight prior to and at the time of impact. The pilot was licensed in accordance with Transport Canada regulations. The pilot was not instrument rated; however, he had received extensive instrument flight training during the past year. The pilot had intentionally entered cloud on a previous flight. The group organizer indicated that they neither requested nor received updated weather information after their briefing in Sept- les. The en route and destination weather deteriorated as the flight progressed. It is probable that the pilot intentionally entered cloud, unaware of his proximity to rising terrain. No firm conclusions could be made regarding the pilot's blood-alcohol concentration.

