

Analysis


When the aircraft was examined, the only discrepancy identified was the missing carburettor inlet screen, and this was not a factor in the accident. The aircraft flight controls were examined in detail and determined to have been fully functional at the time of the occurrence. Since the aircraft flight controls were intact and functional, the steep banked turns that caused the aircraft to stall during the turn to final were likely pilot-induced manoeuvres. The functional flight controls also mean that the pilot would have been able to recover from a stall, had there been sufficient altitude. The three landing gear marks at the beginning of the wreckage trail indicate that the aircraft was in a relatively wings-level, nose-down attitude when it hit the ground. In this attitude the aircraft's speed would have been increasing, and it is likely the pilot was in the process of recovering from the stall when the aircraft struck the ground.


The aircraft flaps were found in the fully retracted position, which was not consistent with the pilot's normal landing configuration. From this it can be concluded that the pilot was either intending to select full flap on final approach or that he had no intention of landing on this approach.


It is unlikely that the amount of ethyl alcohol found in the pilot's blood and urine would have, of itself, impaired the pilot's ability to handle the aircraft. There is no measurement of how the Prozac might have affected his performance nor is there any way to measure the combined effect of alcohol, Prozac, and the antihistamine. The specific air regulations regarding alcohol and drugs, applicable to all pilots, were enacted to minimize the negative affects of alcohol and drugs on pilots' flying skills.


The following Engineering Branch report was completed:


LP 121/96 - Instrument Analysis



Findings


The carburettor fuel inlet screen had been removed, and the aircraft had been operated without the screen for an unknown period of time. The pilot had not revealed his prescription for, and use of, Prozac at his last aviation medical. It is probable that the pilot had ingested alcohol within eight hours of the flight. The aircraft stalled during a turn to final approach, and the pilot was not able to recover before the aircraft struck the ground.

