

Analysis


The weather conditions at the time of the occurrence were ideal for flying training and were not a factor in the accident.


The ATS radar information indicates that during the last vertical manoeuvre that originated at about 4 000 feet asl, the aircraft descended rotationally at a high descent rate. The observed low speed indicated that the aircraft was in a spin and not in a spiral dive. The last three ATS radar returns showing the aircraft continuing its descent while tracking in a westerly direction, together with the ground witness observation of the aircraft appearing to be momentarily level on a westerly heading, support the hypothesis that at least one of the pilots may have succeeded in recovering the aircraft from the spin and was attempting to recover from the ensuing aircraft descent. The subsequent abrupt wing drop and nose-down descent observed by the witness on the ground shortly prior to ground impact likely indicate that a secondary stall was induced during the attempted spin recovery. The very low altitude precluded recovery from the stall.


It is not known why a spin would have been continued below 3 700 feet asl. Based on the experience level and reputation of the instructor, it is unlikely that he would have engaged in a dangerous training practice or intentionally allowed the aircraft to continue spinning below the minimum altitude specified in CARs. Until the occurrence manoeuvre, the pilot had adhered to the minimum altitude required by CARs and shown airmanship consistent with his professional reputation. It is unlikely that either pilot would have intentionally allowed the spin to continue to a low altitude above the ground. It is more likely that some other factor intervened and caused recovery action to be delayed until ground contact was imminent.


It is possible for confusion or conflict to occur with regard to which pilot has control of the aircraft and is taking corrective action, particularly in a scenario involving an instructor pilot and a student instructor; as a result, a manoeuvre could inadvertently be continued unsafely. Given the experience level of the instructor and the reported harmonious relationship between the pilots, it is unlikely that a poor instructor/student relationship developed during the flight that could have affected their judgement or ability to control the aircraft.


No pre-impact mechanical failure was found in the aircraft control system which would have caused a loss of control or control difficulties. Additionally, the observed probable recovery attempt indicates that the aircraft control system was functioning. Although the amount of power being produced by the engine could not be determined accurately, the engine was functioning and would not have prevented recovery from either the spin or a subsequent stall. The only technical anomaly found was the exhaust gas leak at the number 4 cylinder which could have potentially leaked past the firewall and introduced carbon monoxide into the cabin. Because both crew members were nonsmokers, they were found to have carbon monoxide levels of about three to nine per cent for the pilot-in-command and zero to five per cent for the student pilot; it is likely that some exhaust gases had been introduced into the aircraft cabin from the exhaust leak during the flight and was absorbed in their blood as they breathed the cabin air. Because of the location of the exhaust leak, to the left rear of the engine, it is possible that the concentration of carbon monoxide was greater near the pilot-in-command, and that his blood saturation level was consequently higher than that of the student pilot.


The carbon monoxide saturation levels found in both pilots, as detected by the toxicology testing, are not normally considered of significance in relation to an individual's performance; however, when a factor of four per cent is added because of the effects of decreased oxygen availability at 4 000 feet asl, the range becomes seven to thirteen per cent for the pilot-in-command and four to nine per cent for the student pilot. Although these carbon monoxide levels would not be expected to have a large effect on their performance, some effect cannot be ruled out. Additionally, the mild atherosclerosis found during the microscopic analysis of the pilot-in-command's coronary arteries, in conjunction with the low level of carbon monoxide, may have triggered some degree of incapacitation from angina. If any such incapacitation occurred, particularly during a critical manoeuvre such as a spin, control of the aircraft could have been affected. This hypothesis could not be corroborated.


The user directions for the carbon monoxide detector are printed on the back of the detector and are obscured when the detector is installed. Because the carbon monoxide detector returns to its unexposed colour when the air freshens, checking the detector only during pre-start cockpit checks does not alert the crew of any previous carbon monoxide leaks into the cockpit. The detector would have to be checked periodically during flight to alert the crew of the presence of carbon monoxide. It is not known if the crew were aware of the detector's operating characteristics, or whether the crew noted the condition of the carbon monoxide detector during the flight.


The following Engineering Branch reports were completed:


LP 2/98 - Exhaust System Examination LP 196/97 - Instrument Examination



Findings


Records indicate that both crew members were certified and qualified for the flight in accordance with existing regulations. Weather was not a factor. The company maintenance records indicate that the aircraft was certified and maintained for flight in accordance with existing regulations. There was no evidence found of any airframe or engine malfunction prior to or during the flight. The engine cylinder compression rings were worn beyond manufacturer's specifications thereby allowing combustion gases to escape into the crankcase, and the combustion byproducts were being exhausted overboard through the crankcase manifold venting system. Exhaust gases leaking from a small hole in the number 4 cylinder exhaust stack resulted in a build-up of carbon monoxide in the engine compartment. Some of the carbon monoxide likely leaked past the engine firewall and exposed the crew to a low level of carbon monoxide in the cabin. Toxicology tests for the presence of illicit drugs or alcohol were negative. Toxicology tests for the presence of carbon monoxide revealed a level of zero to five per cent for the student pilot and three to nine per cent for the pilot-in-command. The decreased oxygen availability with altitude would have had the equivalent effect on the crew's physiology as would a carbon monoxide range of seven to thirteen per cent for the pilot and up to four to nine per cent for the co-pilot. The crew would have been experiencing some mild physiological effects from a low level of carbon monoxide in the cabin, although normally such low carbon monoxide levels would not be expected to have a large effect on performance. The microscopic examination during the postmortem indicated that the pilot-in-command had mild atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries. Although the pilot-in-command's mild atherosclerosis condition could have made him somewhat more susceptible to angina because of the effects of carbon monoxide in the cabin, whether such incapacitation took place could not be determined. The manoeuvre initiated at 4 000 feet asl was continued below the CARs minimum aerobatic recovery altitude for unknown reasons. An attempt appears to have been made to recover from a secondary aerodynamic stall at low level but could not be accomplished in the altitude remaining. The user directions for the carbon monoxide detector are printed on the back of the detector and are obscured when the detector is installed.

