

Analysis


The pilot had not taken enough rest in preparation for the flight he was to undertake. He had not allowed enough time to prepare his camps for the hunting season, placing himself under pressure. He was highly stressed because of the very tight schedules he had set for himself. The pilot, pressed for time, did not check the cargo weight on the scale available on the Air Saguenay loading dock. He decided to take off with an aircraft that was overloaded and whose centre of gravity was too far aft. Knowing that his clients were already flying to the camps, and that the cooks had not yet arrived, led him to be determined to take off on his second attempt. The aircraft used a greater than normal distance before lifting off. At any time during this second attempt, the pilot could have aborted the take-off run and revised his load, but he decided to continue.


The aircraft took an abnormally long distance before rising out of the water because of its nose-up attitude, caused by the fact that the centre of gravity was outside the envelope and displaced aft, and because of the excess weight. This nose-up attitude of the floats in the water caused drag that prevented the aircraft from accelerating during the take-off run within the normal distance. After 8,000 feet of take-off run, which is over twice the distance normally required, the aircraft lifted off, partly due to the ground effects phenomenon. The observed behaviour of the aircraft on take-off suggests that the estimates of the aircraft's weight by the pilot and the employees were too low. Then the pilot, seeing the approaching obstacles on the shoreline, pulled back on the controls to try to clear them. The aircraft was travelling at 80 mph, which is well below the recommended climb speed of 120 mph, and even below the speed for the best climb angle of 107 mph. Due to its configuration, the aircraft stall speed was higher than normal. It can thus be concluded that the aircraft was in the slow flying range. The more the pilot pulled back the controls, the greater the drag. Thus the aircraft could not attain a climb rate sufficient to clear the obstacles on its flight path, and it struck the high-voltage lines and a pole.


The following laboratory report was completed:


LP 138/97 - Engine and Propellers Examination, Aztec PA-23-250, C-GFNT.



Findings


The pilot did not allow enough time to prepare his camps for the hunting season, thereby putting pressure on himself. The pilot was fatigued, because he did not take enough rest in preparation for the flight. The aircraft was overloaded, and the centre of gravity was outside the envelope. The aircraft covered a longer than normal distance before lifting off. The pilot did not abort the second take-off and decided to continue the flight rather than revise the loading in accordance with the recommended weight and centre of gravity. Just before the occurrence, the aircraft was in the slow flying range, and it therefore could not attain a rate of climb sufficient to clear the obstacles on its flight path.

