

Analysis


The pilot is responsible for the safe operation of an aircraft. Based on the type of flying that was planned and executed, the pilot was aware that obstacles, such as wires crossing the rail tracks, were his primary concern during low-altitude operations. The pilot stated that he had carried out aerial reconnaissances of all the film runs except the last film run. The area beyond where the film run was started provided several miles of track where an aerial reconnaissance could have been completed and the filming requirements met. The pilot's decision to complete the task without conducting an aerial reconnaissance resulted in his overlooking a vital safety precaution. As indicated by the CN representative, low flight was not required for the tasking; however, the pilot decided to fly at a skid height of about 12 feet above the train. This decision to fly at such a low altitude placed the helicopter in such a position that it struck the wires crossing the rail tracks. The resulting wire strike caused the pitch control rods to fail, and the pilot lost control of the helicopter.


More serious injuries to the occupants of the aircraft probably were prevented by the wearing of the lap and shoulder harnesses. The serious injuries to the cameraman probably were related to the camera console that he was carrying.


The helicopter was not equipped with a WSPS. The helicopter struck the wire at a position where a WSPS probably would have cut the wire.



Findings


The helicopter was being used to film CN trains while flying at low altitude. The pilot had been briefed that he should not overfly the train at low altitude. The pilot and company chief pilot had discussed the hazards of low flight before the beginning of the operation. The portion of track being used for the final film run had not been reconnoitred by the pilot before the filming run. While at a height of about 12 feet above the rolling stock, the helicopter struck two electrical wires which spanned the track at right angles to the direction of flight. The wires contacted the pitch control rods which failed, and the pilot lost control of the helicopter. The helicopter was not fitted with a wire strike protection system. The pilot's lap belt failed. The failure was most likely attributed to a deterioration in strength due to long-term exposure to sunlight.

